Improve installation docs (#376)
Deltares/hydromt_wflow: docs/getting_started/installation.rst

Installation Guide
==================

Prerequisites
=============
For more information about the prerequisites for an installation of the HydroMT package
and related dependencies, please visit the documentation of

> `HydroMT core <https://deltares.github.io/hydromt/stable/guides/user_guide/installation.html>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`HydroMT core <https://deltares.github.io/hydromt/latest/guides/user_guide/installation.html>`_
```

Since some dependencies are only availabe through conda-forge and some only through pypi, you will need a packange manager that can handle both.

Installation
============

There are various ways in which one can install hydrom_wflow in a python environment, the main being:

- :ref:`Pixi <user_install_pixi>`
- :ref:`Miniforge/conda <user_install_conda>`

All of these options will be discussed below but we recommend using pixi, as it is the fastest and most
robust (and reproducible) option.

.. _user_install_pixi:

Installation using Pixi
-----------------------

.. Tip::

    This is our recommended way of installing HydroMT-Wflow!

If you do not have a ``pyproject.toml`` yet you can make one by executing the command:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pixi init --format pyproject myproject

A new folder with a ``pyproject.toml`` called ``myproject`` will be created for you. After this, you can
navigate to this new directory and add ``hydromt_wflow`` as a dependency:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pixi add hydromt_wflow[extra, examples] --pypi

Pixi will then add it as a dependency to the project. The ``[full]`` is to make sure you include all

> of the optional dependencies.

Reviewer: `[full]` doesn't exist. Please remove this sentence.

You can also add the optional dependencies to it like so:

.. code-block:: console

  $ pixi add gwwapi --pypi
  $ pixi add hydroengine --pypi
  $ pixi add pcraster
  $ pixi add --pypi wradlib
  $ pixi add --pypi pyet

>   $ pixi add gdal

Reviewer: I think this is now wrong with the lines above.

If you install over pypi, `[extra]` will already give you the optional dependencies. So you would not need to add gwwapi, hydroengine, wradlib, pyet.

If you install over `pixi add hydromt_wflow`, you will not get any of the optionals and would have to do this.

I would rather see, like `xarray`, that we add all optionals in the conda recipe. For pypi I'm okay with optionals. In that case wradlib, pyet, pcraster and gdal would already be installed via the recipe. Still, like in the conda instructions, one would still have to install gwwapi and hydroengine via pip.

Author: I think that is a good one, but we can't do this now as it can only be done during release time, so we'll have to make a note of that for the next release.

Author: I will add some explanations about when you'd need to install the optional dependencies

Reviewer: pyet and wradlib are available through conda-forge. Please remove `--pypi`

- `gdal <https://gdal.org/en/stable/>`_ Provides many drivers and GIS transformations.  Only available through conda-forge.

Since some dependencies are only availabe through conda-forge and some only through pypi, you will need a packange manager that can handle both.

Installation
============

There are various ways in which one can install hydrom_wflow in a python environment, the main being:

- :ref:`Pixi <user_install_pixi>`
- :ref:`Miniforge/conda <user_install_conda>`

All of these options will be discussed below but we recommend using pixi, as it is the fastest and most
robust (and reproducible) option.

.. _user_install_pixi:

Installation using Pixi
-----------------------

.. Tip::

    This is our recommended way of installing HydroMT-Wflow!

If you do not have a ``pyproject.toml`` yet you can make one by executing the command:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pixi init --format pyproject myproject

A new folder with a ``pyproject.toml`` called ``myproject`` will be created for you. After this, you can
navigate to this new directory and add ``hydromt_wflow`` as a dependency:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pixi add hydromt_wflow[extra, examples] --pypi

> Pixi will then add it as a dependency to the project. The ``[extra, examples]`` instruct pixi to also

Reviewer: Since we were just looking at the source that is being built by flit, it seems that the `examples` optional package is not needed, only if you can get your hands on the examples. Should we just say `hydromt_wflow[extras]`?

Author: good point, I'm not sure anymore why I included the examples there

Installation Guide
==================

.. _optional_dependencies:

Optional Dependencies
=====================

HydroMT-Wflow has several optional dependencies that need to be installed in your environment to enable specific
functionalities, though they are not necessary for hydromt-wflow to function as a whole. Due to limitations in the conda-forge
package specification you will have to install these yourself in addition to hydromt-wflow if you want to use them.

They are:
- `pcraster <https://pcraster.geo.uu.nl>`_ This one is used for the reading and writing of pcr maps. Note that this one is only available on conda-forge so if you install hydromt-wflow through pypi you will not be able to access this functionality.
- `gwwapi <https://github.com/global-water-watch/gww-api>`_ This one is used for providing more resources about reservoirs and how to set them up. This one is only available through pypi at the moment.
- `hydroengine <https://github.com/openearth/hydro-engine>`_ Similar to ``gwwapi`` the ``hydroengine`` package gives access to more data sources, and is currently only available through pypi.

> - `wraplib <https://github.com/wradlib/wradlib>`_ This package provides downloading and processing functionalities of radar weather data.

Reviewer 2: typo wraplib -> wradlib

- `gwwapi <https://github.com/global-water-watch/gww-api>`_ (optional)

> - `hydroengine <https://github.com/openearth/hydro-engine>`_ (optional)

Reviewer: Should wradlib and pyet also be in this list?

Installation
============

There are various ways in which one can install hydrom_wflow in a python environment, the main being:

- :ref:`Pixi <user_install_pixi>`
- :ref:`Miniforge/conda <user_install_conda>`

All of these options will be discussed below but we recommend using pixi, as it is the fastest and most
robust (and reproducible) option.

.. _user_install_pixi:

Installation using Pixi
-----------------------

.. Tip::

    This is our recommended way of installing HydroMT-Wflow!

If you do not have a ``pyproject.toml`` yet you can make one by executing the command:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pixi init --format pyproject myproject

A new folder with a ``pyproject.toml`` called ``myproject`` will be created for you. After this, you can
navigate to this new directory and add ``hydromt_wflow`` as a dependency:

.. code-block:: console

>     $ pixi add hydromt_wflow[full] --pypi

Reviewer: I was mistaken. `full` doesn't exist in the pyproject. Instead one should use:

```suggestion
    $ pixi add hydromt_wflow[extra, examples] --pypi
```

`full` doesn't exist and I don't think people really need everything. Only `extra` and `examples`.

Pixi will then add it as a dependency to the project. The ``[full]`` is to make sure you include all
of the optional dependencies.

You can also add the optional dependencies to it like so:

.. code-block:: console

  $ pixi add gwwapi --pypi
  $ pixi add hydroengine --pypi

>   $ pixi add pcraster --pypi

Reviewer: pcraster is a conda dependency only, just like gdal. So I don't think pcraster --pypi will work.

Also, I miss pyet and wradlib.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  $ pixi add gwwapi --pypi
  $ pixi add hydroengine --pypi
  $ pixi add pcraster
  $ pixi add --pypi wradlib
  $ pixi add --pypi pyet
  $ pixi add gdal
```

.. code-block:: console

  (hydromt-wflow) $ python path/to/script.py

If you did not activate the shell you can still run the script in the environment by running it through pixi:

.. code-block:: console

  (hydromt-wflow) $ pixi run path/to/script.py

If you intend to only use `hydromt_wflow` via the cli you can also install it globally using pixi like so:

.. code-block:: console

  $ pixi global install hydromt_wflow

This will install hydromt_wflow in an isolated environment for you and make it available to run from basically
anywhere on your system through the commandline

.. _user_install_conda:

Installation using Conda
------------------------

.. warning::

  Due to the changes Anaconda made to their `lisencing agreements in 2024 <https://legal.anaconda.com/policies/en/?name=terms-of-service#anaconda-terms-of-service>`
  using any packages from the anaconda channel (which is available by default in the main `conda` and `mamba` distributions) may require a paid license.
  Therefore we highly recommend you only use the free and community maintained `conda-forge` channel. While you can configure existing `conda` / `mamba`

>   instaltions to do this correctly, we recommend that if you do not want to use pixi, that you use a `miniforge<https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge>` distribution which has this correctly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  installations to do this correctly, we recommend that if you do not want to use pixi, that you use a `miniforge<https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge>` distribution which has this correctly
```

>   configured by default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  configured by default.
```

Installation
============

There are various ways in which one can install hydrom_wflow in a python environment, the main being:

- :ref:`Pixi <user_install_pixi>`
- :ref:`Miniforge/conda <user_install_conda>`

All of these options will be discussed below but we recommend using pixi, as it is the fastest and most
robust (and reproducible) option.

.. _user_install_pixi:

Installation using Pixi
-----------------------

.. Tip::

    This is our recommended way of installing HydroMT-Wflow!

You can add HydroMT-Wflow to any python environment that is defined in either a `pyproject.toml` or `pixi.toml` by
running the command:

.. code-block:: shell

>     $ pixi add hydromt_wflow

Reviewer: I would maybe write here:

```sh
    $ pixi init myproject
    $ cd myproject
    $ pixi add hydromt_wflow
```

So that it's clear that you are starting a new project.

> Pixi will then it as a dependency to either your `pyproject.toml` or `pixi.toml` depending on which it can find
> (in that order or precedence).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pixi will then add it as a dependency to either pixi project.
```

You can also add the optional dependencies to it like so:

.. code-block:: console

  $ pixi add gwwapi --pypi
  $ pixi add hydroengine --pypi

>   $ pixi add pcraster --pypi

Reviewer: If you did pixi add hydromt_wflow, you will have the full version from conda-forge. No need for these optionals. Only if you do `pixi add --pypi hydromt_wflow`.

    Please take into account that gwwapi or hydroengine packages are not available from conda and therefore have to be installed from pypi separately (in the activated environment).

    .. code-block:: console

      (hydromt-wflow) $ pip install gwwapi

>       (hydromt-wflow) $ pip install hydroengine

Reviewer: You will also need to tell the user to `conda install pyet` and the other optionals.
